---
layout: post
title: who am I?
date: 2020-10-20 11:12:00-0400
description: a more personal anecdote about myself
---

I am a first-generation Latino scholar from a low-income migrant family.
In my situation, where there is a shortage of both money and knowledge on how to become a college graduate, dreams about college seemed unrealistic.
As an adolescent, the only things I knew about college were from pop culture: it is expensive, social events are abundant, and sports are everything.
Fortunately, people early in my life inspired to dream about college, regardless of how impractical it seemed.
My journey to becoming a computer science college graduate inspired me to become a professor who conducts novel research, emboldens future scholars, and creates a truly inclusive environment that will nurture students most at-risk of dropping out.

Growing up, I never really though much about college, at least until I entered sixth-grade.
One day, my sixth-grade teacher pulled me aside to encourage me to consider college.
He explained to me how a college education could positively impact my life, and how a [AVID](https://www.avid.org/) can make college become a reality.
This notion that my life could change for the better drove me to want to become the first college graduate in my family.
From this point on, AVID prepared me for college by providing tutors, campus visits, and workshops.
Unfortunately, the weekly meetings were not nearly enough to prepare me for the complexities of the first step --- the application process.

One of the greatest challenges I faced was having to contended with the educational deficiencies of my school district.
The schools lacked resources as did the families of the the students: the majority of my classmates in the Fresno Unified School District also came from low-income, minority backgrounds.
Even when students graduated, they were underprepared for college, and I would not understand the impact of this until I arrived to college.
These statistics were demoralizing, as I had to compete not only with other college applicants, but the circumstances I inherited.

Another big challenge I faced was having to overcome the lack of mentorship I could receive about college.
Upon starting college applications, I realized that research outside of AVID was needed to improve my chances of being admitted.
I spent countless hours gathering information on what makes a college application stand out, requirements, and important deadlines.
The amount of information quickly became overwhelming and I scheduled meetings with school counselors for help, because up to this point, my only form of guidance came from a self-assessment quiz to discover colleges and majors.

My first semester at MSU quickly revealed the educational and socioeconomic disparity between my peers and me.
It was here where I finally realized the impact of all the circumstances I inherited.
I began to struggle with imposter syndrome, as other students eased through course material, while I struggled immensely.
To combat this educational disparity, I invested countless nights in a computer lab, studying until I had a deep understanding of course materials.
I also became a frequent feature in my professors' office hours, which gained me new mentors.
Gradually, I thrived academically, but still wanted to immerse myself more within the MSU community and give back.

I became an Intercultural Aide (ICA) within the residence halls to assist all students who experienced a similar feeling of struggling and not belonging.
I used my background and experiences to connect with students of diverse backgrounds and cultures.
I helped students academically by pointing them to tutoring centers and other academic resources.
I organized inclusive multicultural events, such as round table discussions regarding social justice issues, to help students immerse themselves within the MSU community.
As an ICA, I worked against dismayingly low retention rates for minorities within college systems.
This experience established my goal of becoming a professor to help improve retention rates for minorities.

Throughout my college career, I noticed a lack of people resembling me within academia.
To improve STEM exposure in underserved communities, I made it an emphasis early in my academic career to participate in STEM outreach activities.
I worked with numerous clubs that focused on teaching computer science (list can be found in <a class="page-link" href="{{ '/outreach' | prepend: site.baseurl | prepend: site.url }}">outreach</a>).
Participants ranged from elementary to high school, possessed diverse backgrounds and cultures, and came from local underserved communities.
I fell in love with teaching when I noticed students' expressions change as they began to understand a complex topic.
Currently, I continue to do outreach at computer science workshops, volunteer as a mentor and tutor for undergraduate students, and am the graduate advisor for the Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers.
These experiences reinforced my goal of becoming a professor who inspires underrepresented students by showing them that anyone can succeed in STEM and providing myself as a resource.

Being a first-generation minority gained me new perspectives and experiences, but more importantly taught me the importance of my story and presence within academia.
Not seeing many people like me in academia had a major impact on me, but I hope to mitigate this for others as a professor in the future.
A professor who not only conducts novel research, but inspires students and advocates for initiatives that positively impact retention rates within universities.

**It goes without saying that I wouldn't be where I am today if it weren't for the amazing friends and mentors I met along the way. With the greatest sincerity, thank you!**